Add technical overview (#214)
xmtp/libxmtp: TECHNICAL_OVERVIEW.md

---

## Abstract

XMTP v3 introduces double-ratchet messaging to the XMTP network. This provides users with forward secrecy, post-compromise security, and the ability to grant and revoke messaging access at the per-app-installation level. The one-to-one encryption channel introduced in XMTP v3 additionally provides a building block for future work described in [Roadmap](#roadmap).

The first iteration is built on top of [Matrix’s Olm](https://gitlab.matrix.org/matrix-org/olm/-/blob/master/docs/olm.md), an implementation of the cryptographic ratchet described by Signal’s [Double Ratchet Algorithm](https://whispersystems.org/docs/specifications/doubleratchet/). This document describes the details of this system in the context of XMTP, a permissionless messaging network for blockchain identities.

## Objectives

- **Grow the XMTP network securely:** The suite of security properties introduced in XMTP v3 will reduce risk from potentially malicious apps and actors as we grow the XMTP network. These properties are displayed below.

> - **More transparent and agile protocol development:** The core of XMTP v3 is [libxmtp](https://www.notion.so/DRAFT-XMTP-v3-technical-design-17e63194ef7c4803b7eb3dd6051b6019?pvs=21), a Rust library that can be consumed across multiple platforms. Streamlining XMTP’s cryptographic code and protocol logic into one open-source repository allows for increased auditability, security, and development velocity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **More transparent and agile protocol development:** The core of XMTP v3 is [libxmtp](https://github.com/xmtp/libxmtp), a Rust library that can be consumed across multiple platforms. Streamlining XMTP’s cryptographic code and protocol logic into one open-source repository allows for increased auditability, security, and development velocity.
```

Reviewer: @richardhuaaa Just one link tweak here! <3

Using an existing library like Olm for the first iteration of double ratchet in XMTP can reduce the risks associated with "rolling your own" cryptographic implementation. Limitations of Olm are described in [Limitations and future work](#limitations-and-future-work).

## The messaging protocol

In XMTP v3, **conversations** between **accounts** are carried out via pair-wise **sessions** between app **installations**:

- An **account** consists of multiple app installations. To learn more, see [Account management](#account-management).
- A **conversation** consists of multiple pair-wise sessions between installations. To learn more, see [Conversation management](#conversation-management).
- Messages are individually encrypted and delivered at the **session** level. To learn more, see [Session management](#session-management).
- Delivery of messages happens via network **topics**. To learn more, see [Network topic structure](#network-topic-structure).

### Network topic structure

XMTP nodes currently store data using Waku topics. Clients may publish, request, or subscribe to data from these topics. The purpose of these topics will be described in subsequent sections.

> - **`contact-<walletAddress>`**: Signed installation contact bundles for a given user account.

Reviewer 2: Is this going to interfere with v2?

Reviewer 3: We use a different prefix for all v3 topics so there is no potential for collision.

**Client-side fanout**

XMTP v3 uses pair-wise sessions between all of the installations in a conversation, which carries the following drawbacks:

- $*O(n)*$ processing time and network usage as the number of installations in the conversation increases.
- No transcript consistency guarantee: Senders are not guaranteed to send the same message content to all installations in a conversation.

Future versions of the protocol will build group messaging channels on top of the peer-to-peer messaging primitive introduced in v3 to mitigate these issues.

**Exposed metadata**

- **Contact bundles:** All contact bundles (and accompanying signature text) are visible to the XMTP network. This is by design and necessary for session-based encryption. Observers are able to deduce the following for a given wallet address:
  - Number of messaging installations
  - Creation time of each installation
- **Payload metadata**: Payload metadata available on the network is limited to:

>   - Recipient installation address: Inbound topics contain a unique `installation_id`. for example, `message-0dYHO5xN+oj3T1gjC3odBj81j0ToP4l62N7oAFzrvGs`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Recipient installation address: Inbound topics contain a unique `installation_id`. For example, `message-0dYHO5xN+oj3T1gjC3odBj81j0ToP4l62N7oAFzrvGs`.
```
